feat: CRP-2823 add developer docs for IBE and timelocks (#5811)
dfinity/portal: docs/building-apps/network-features/vetkeys/identity-based-encryption.mdx

```rust no-repl reference
https://github.com/dfinity/vetkeys/blob/dd255c8fa1ec0356f9448f1728ed4d6a5b736308/examples/basic_ibe/backend/src/lib.rs#L70-L83
```

</TabItem>
</AdornedTabs>

The public key needs to only be fetched once and it can be used to encrypt data for multiple recipients by deriving corresponding subkeys locally.
It is a good practice to use a domain separator in `context` to split IBE from other eventual uses of vetKeys the canister may do.
A domain separator can be any arbitrary unique byte string.

### Step 2: Obtain IBE public key and encrypt data in the frontend
Use the [frontend `@dfinity/vetkeys` library](https://dfinity.github.io/vetkeys/classes/_dfinity_vetkeys.IbeCiphertext.html#encrypt) to encrypt data and store it in the canister.
To encrypt messages, the sender uses recipient's principal as the encryption identity (set in the `input` variable of the `vetkd_derive_key` arguments).

<AdornedTabs groupId="languages">

<TabItem value="ts" label="TypeScript" default>

```ts no-repl reference
https://github.com/dfinity/vetkeys/blob/dd255c8fa1ec0356f9448f1728ed4d6a5b736308/examples/basic_ibe/frontend/src/main.ts#L49-L69
```

</TabItem>
</AdornedTabs>

> ### Step 3: Allow to obtain the IBE private key from the backend

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Step 3: Obtain the IBE private key from the backend
```

> Expose a canister endpoint that allows to fetch the IBE private key of the user making the call.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Expose a canister endpoint that can fetch the IBE private key of the user making the call.
```

<AdornedTabs groupId="languages">

<TabItem value="rs" label="Rust" default>

> ```rust no-repl reference

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```rust reference
```

https://github.com/dfinity/vetkeys/blob/dd255c8fa1ec0356f9448f1728ed4d6a5b736308/examples/basic_ibe/backend/src/lib.rs#L85-L101
```

</TabItem>
</AdornedTabs>

> The transport public key required for the call is a throw-away key that is generated by the [`@dfinity/vetkeys` library](https://dfinity.github.io/vetkeys/classes/_dfinity_vetkeys.TransportSecretKey.html#random) in the frontend.
> The private key needs to only be fetched once and it can be used to decrypt multiple ciphertexts, independent from senders' identities.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The transport public key used for the call is a temporary, throwaway key generated on the frontend by the [`@dfinity/vetkeys`](https://dfinity.github.io/vetkeys/classes/_dfinity_vetkeys.TransportSecretKey.html#random) library. The corresponding private key only needs to be fetched once and can be reused to decrypt multiple cipher texts, regardless of the senders’ identities.
```

> ### Step 4: Obtain IBE private key and decrypt data in the frontend

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Step 4: Obtain the IBE private key and decrypt data in the frontend
```

> Obtain the encrypted data from the canister or other storage location.
> Decrypt the IBE-encrypted data in the frontend using the [frontend `@dfinity/vetkeys` library](https://dfinity.github.io/vetkeys/classes/_dfinity_vetkeys.IbeCiphertext.html#decrypt).
> See more details on the [API page](/docs/building-apps/network-features/vetkeys/api) for more details regarding the basic flow of obtaining vetKeys.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Obtain the encrypted data from the canister or another storage location. Decrypt the IBE-encrypted data in the frontend using the [`@dfinity/vetkeys` frontend library](https://dfinity.github.io/vetkeys/classes/_dfinity_vetkeys.IbeCiphertext.html#decrypt).

For a detailed overview of the basic flow for obtaining `vetKeys`, refer to the [API documentation](/docs/building-apps/network-features/vetkeys/api).

```

<AdornedTabs groupId="languages">

<TabItem value="ts" label="TypeScript" default>

> ```ts no-repl reference

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```ts reference
```

https://github.com/dfinity/vetkeys/blob/dd255c8fa1ec0356f9448f1728ed4d6a5b736308/examples/basic_ibe/frontend/src/main.ts#L71-L97
```

</TabItem>
</AdornedTabs>

> ## Demos

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Examples
```

---

keywords: [advanced, concept, vetkd, vetkeys, encryption, identity based encryption, threshold decryption, encrypted threshold key derivation]

---

import { MarkdownChipRow } from "/src/components/Chip/MarkdownChipRow";
import TabItem from "@theme/TabItem";
import { AdornedTabs } from "/src/components/Tabs/AdornedTabs";

# Identity-based encryption (IBE)

<MarkdownChipRow labels={["Advanced", "vetKeys", "Identity-based encryption"]} />

The vetKeys feature enables IBE, allowing data to be encrypted directly to an identity, such as a principal, an Internet Identity, an email address, or even an Ethereum address. This makes it possible to encrypt data for a specific user or account, even if that user has never previously interacted with the dapp. By authenticating with the dapp using their identity, the user can securely retrieve their decryption key and access the data.

> Compared to DKMS, IBE works differently. In DKMS, one or more users share the same symmetric key, and only those users can encrypt and decrypt data using that key. In contrast, IBE is an asymmetric encryption scheme. Anyone can encrypt messages to a given identity, including other users or canisters, but only the holder of the corresponding decryption key can decrypt them.

Author: https://github.com/dfinity/vetkeys/pull/138 removes "root'. It doesn't replace it with "master" and instead just says IBE public key.

## How to use IBE?

> In the following steps, to explain how to use IBE with vetKeys we show parts of the [basic IBE example](https://github.com/dfinity/vetkeys/tree/3b1de5d546dcc32daaf22b21baaa2b220bc857f3/examples/basic_ibe), which implements a simple IBE messaging system between principals.

Author: It is now explained that identity is the principal in step 2, where we explain encryption.

As for the single canister architecture, maybe we could just not mention it for now? We currently don't discuss any multi-canister setups, so nothing suggests there could be another canister. And if we explicitly say in this setup we have a single canister, then we should probably also explain that we could use multiple canisters as well. WDYT?

> ### Step 1: Obtain the IBE public key

Author: Both the IBE and timelock page now explain domain separator and identity/input.
